# {{ Page }}

# Mad Liberation 2023

## Call to order

{{ A brief salutation // Hi! //  // Oh, hey. }}. This is the moment we’ve been waiting for. This is {{ a highly anticipated event // My wedding day // // the Superbowl }}. This is {{ an event of great importance to the world // the discovery of gravity // // the Copernican Revolution }}. This is Passover.

‘Tis a time of {{ something positive // gaiety // I am enjoying all of this (or these) ___. // well-mannered frivolity }} and {{ edible things // pasta // You can eat _. // the contents of seder plates }}.

In today’s age of {{ something bizarre // purple warts // __ is/are crazy! // baby-eating dingos }} , it is important to remember that we {{ intransitive verb // stand // we __  over here // meditate }} together as one {{ noun // liver // That is a(n) ___ // elephant trunk }}.

Our ritual shall be unique. Once in a lifetime. Like {{ something that only happens once // the Copernican Revolution // // the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event }}. And created by us. Like {{ something you have created // a basket at summer camp // I have created _. // problems }}. But with food.

## # {{ Page }}

## Leaving the leavened

No, we are not eating yet!

Instead, let’s reflect on how we got here. One of us got here by {{ the way you got here tonight // riding a donkey // I got here tonight by _. // making excellent life choices }}. And we’ve prepared. One of us prepared by {{ something you did to prepare for tonight // finding a babysitter // I prepared for tonight by _. // letting go of all my inhibitions }}. So much preparation has gone into tonight.

But I want to focus on one thing: bread. {{ A way to describe bread // The gift of the gods // Bread is _. // A blessing and a curse }}. Some people call it hametz. They’re called Jews. And the hametz has got to go.

As part of our prep, we disposed of our hametz, by {{ getting rid of something in a discreet fashion // hiding it in my sock // I’ll get rid of that thing by _. // flushing it down the toilet }}, and by {{ a creative way to get rid of hametz (leavened things like crackers) // making it into a bread house and selling it //  // passing it off to strangers }}.

We did this because {{ the reason we get rid of hametz (leavened things like bread) // matzah is better // We cleanse our homes of hametz because _. //  there is beauty in ritual }}. And because {{ a famous person, or a person you know, who is gluten intolerant // Super Bowl MVP Drew Brees // // Zooey Deschanel }} is gluten-intolerant, and they might stop by later. We also did it because it was a way to reaffirm our commitments to God. Which we shall do many times tonight, until God says, “{{ something you say to someone who is being repetitive // I heard you the first time! // // Relax already! }}.”

# {{ Page }}

## Agendums

You shall conform to an agenda. No agenda-bending tonight. You’re not the {{ famous gender bender // David Bowie // // Joan of Arc }} of agendae. You will also sing the agenda, for we are all {{ a famous singer // Mavis Staples //  // Gloria Estefan }} in the eyes of God. And our song goes:

[[ Sing the following. ]]

קַדֵּשׁ | kadeish | 

וּרְחַץ | urchatz | 

כַּרְפַּס | karpas | 

יַחַץ | yachatz | 

מַגִּיד | magid | 

רָחְצָה | rachtza | 

מוֹצִיא מַצָּה | motzi matzah | 

מָרוֹר | maror | 

כּוֹרֵךְ | koreich | 

שֻׁלְחָן עוֹרֵךְ | shulchan oreich | 

צָפוּן | tzafoon |

בָּרֵךְ | bareich | 

הַלֵּל | hallel | 

נִרְצָה | nirtzah | 

To reiterate, we are about to:

1. {{ Euphemism for “drink wine” // get grape-faced // // oil ourselves }} (drink wine)

2. {{ Another way to say, “wash hands” // soak them handy wandies // // rinse the old arm-feet }} (wash hands)

3. Dip a green vegetable in water

4. {{ Euphemism for “break the middle matzah” // shatter the unleavened // // split the bread seas }} (break the middle matzah)

5. Tell the story of the Moses, from the perspective of {{ a relatively minor character in Exodus (make one up if you don’t know) // Jethro, the priest of Midian // // the Egyptian who Moses kills }}

6. Wash hands again

7. Motzi the matzah

8. Eat bitter herb

9. Eat bitter herb with matzah

10. {{ Euphemism for “eat dinner” // nourish the tummy with something yummy // // feed }} (eat dinner)

11. Eat the Afikoman

12. Say grace

13. {{ Something you do at the end of a seder // Recline with your people //  // Reflect on the meaning of life and liberty }}

# {{ Page }}

## The first cup of wine | Kadeish

Many of the most important things in life come in groups of four. Tonight we will drink four cups of wine, and this number, four, will speak to us in many ways.

Depending on who you ask, the four cups may symbolize:

1. Sarah, Rebecca, Rachel, and Leah, the matriarchs of Judaism

2. {{ Something good that comes in a group of four // the Beatles: John, Paul, George, and Ringo //  // episodes one through four of the Home Alone film series }}

3. The four promises that God made to the Jews: I will bring you out, I will deliver you, I will redeem you, {{ A promise that God would make to his people // I will deliver you to the land of milk and honey //  // I will condemn you to a life of persecution }}

4. {{ Four things that define your life // Cats, poetry, running, and song //  // Eating, hand cream, sports, and one day settling Mars }}.

The time for the first cup of wine is almost upon us. Let us bless before we imbibe.

   בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, בּוֹרֵא פְּרִי הַגָּפֶן:

    Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam, borei p’ree hagafen.

    בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם,

    שֶׁהֶחֱיָנוּ וְקִיְּמָנוּ וְהִגִּיעָנוּ לַזְּמַן הַזֶּה:    

    Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam,

    she-hechiyanu v’key’manu v’higiyanu lazman hazeh.

Let us imbibe.

## # {{ Page }}

## The first hand-washing | Urchatz

When we were slaves, we had to wash our hands by {{ doing something that makes your hands dirty // picking up worms // I don’t like _, because it makes my hands dirty. // oiling a cast-iron skillet by hand }}. Nowadays we wash our hands properly, as a way of dunking on Pharaoh. In some traditions, sedergoers even wash each others’ hands, which, like {{ a way that you can love another as yourself // showing them compassion // I vow to love others as myself by _. // including them when you order takeout }}, is a way you can love another as yourself.

Watch me wash me:

[[ Pantomime washing your hands. ]]

Now you do you.

[[ All pantomime washing their hands. ]]

We’re clean! Well, cleaner than we were. How will you utilize your newfound state of purity? One of us is going to utilize their newfound state of purity by {{ how you will utilize your newfound state of purity // strutting around town so everyone can see Clean Me // I will utilize my newfound state of purity by _. // touching everything }}.

# {{ Page }}

## Dipping a spring vegetable in water | Karpas

If you’re a {{ type of vegetable, doing something vegetables do // cucumber, suspended in fancy water //  // P.O.T.A.T.O. (Person Over Thirty Acting Twenty-One) }}, this is where you start to get nervous. Or excited. Or just wet. 

Holding our spring veggies closely reminds us to pay attention to the season, to have gratitude for {{ a good thing that happens in the spring, in purple prose // magnolias puckering their petals toward the sun // What I appreciate about spring is _. // dragonflies dancing in the cool April rains }}.

Let us take a moment for gratitude. We will go around the Seder now, each of us saying something for which we are grateful. I will start.

[[ Take turns, each saying something you’re grateful for. ]]

Ok, back to me. If you are so blessed as to have a vegetable and some saltwater handy, please get ready to dip.

If you don’t have saltwater, because {{ a reason to not have saltwater // the Saltwater Bandits stole it // You have no saltwater because _. // Moses split with it }}, then just think of {{ something cringeworthy // the last time you licked a subway floor //  // making out with someone while their teeth were falling out into your mouth }} and cry into a cup.

Saltwater reminds us of the tears shed by the ancestors, as well as the tears shed by those suffering today, and those who are still in bondage. Sitting here, we are grateful for our freedom, but we must remember that there are many others in this world who still are not free.

    בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, בּוֹרֵא פְּרִי הָאֲדָמָה:

    Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam, borei p’ree ha-adama.

    We praise God, Ruler of Everything, who creates the fruits of the earth.

And so there are reasons to rejoice, but there are also reasons to cry. Let's now go around the table, in the opposite order from the sequence we just did, and do the opposite thing.

Everyone say something that makes you sad, or makes you cry.

# {{ Page }}

## Yachatz | Breaking the matzah

We’ve all got matzah. Great. Somebody volunteer, like {{ a type of volunteer // a church youth group leader selling cakes at the bake sale //  // a volunteer fireman }}, with matzah they’re willing to break. Now.

[[ Stage direction: All bear witness as your volunteer breaks matzah. ]]

Chance always picks a favorite. Consider {{ someone lucky, and the reason they are lucky // Jeff Bezos, because he’s so rich //  // a four-time lottery winner, sitting on a trillion dollars }}. Though our holy volunteer has attempted to break the matzah into even pieces, they have failed, just as {{ something that happens that proves life is not fair // young birds eat their weaker brothers //  // packaging makes food taste better }}, and life is not fair. Because one half of our shattered matzah is inevitably bigger, we will call it the Afikoman, which is Hebrew for “{{ something that is often hidden // an extra key //  // grandma’s money }}.” Our volunteer will hide this larger half, because more is hidden in life than is revealed. It’s better that way.

[[ Stage direction: All look away as your volunteer hides the Afikoman. ]]

Now we are all having a good time here at this {{ another term for a Seder // Super Supper // We are gathered here tonight for a _. // Matzah Ball }}, but several hours from now, it will all end. And when that happens, we must pass over the conviviality of our meal and return to the bread of affliction, the snack of suffering, the {{ another name for matzah // cracker of calamity // // cause of my ritual constipation }}. We snack in such fashion to remind us of {{ a form of work you don’t like doing // filing Schedule C //  // the labor of hiding matzah }}. So it is good that we prepared our snacky sacrament, or, I should say, our…snackrament.

# # {{ Page }}

## Pre-magid - The REAL Questions 

As everyone knows, Passover is really all about {{ the meaning of Passover // remembering our people's epic journey from slavery and oppression to freedom // Passover is about _. // libations and liberation }}.

Actually, I shouldn't say, "all." In fact, only all of us who are old enough understand Passover.

Who here is the youngest among us? You get to go before me in reading, as I came before you, child, in this life.

[[ Stage direction: Identify the youngest individual present, and cede control of the seder to them. They read the following: ]]

I wuv being a widdle baby. {{ Something babies or toddlers say // Mommy guh wim the wah wah? // Babies say, “_.” // Waaaaaaaaaaaaaah! }}. I enjoy {{ an advantage of being a baby // getting to wear diapers // // drinking from spill-proof cups }}, and I’m really glad I miss out on {{ something bad about being an adult // having to go to work //  // having to deal with babies }}.

I’m not sure I understand…

[[ Stage direction: Gesture around the room. ]]

Whatever this is.

What are we doing? {{ a question a child would ask // where do babies come from? //  // when is dinner? }}? {{ a ridiculous question // why is your mouth full of coal? //  // who dealt it? }}? Sorry, it’s my first Passover.

I know these are tough questions, so we’d better all sing them together, in Hebrew, so all you ancients can understand.

    מַה נִּשְׁתַּנָּה הַלַּֽיְלָה הַזֶּה מִכָּל הַלֵּילוֹת?

    Ma nishtana halaila hazeh mikol haleilot?

שֶׁבְּכָל הַלֵּילוֹת אָֽנוּ אוֹכְלִין חָמֵץ וּמַצָּה. הַלַּֽיְלָה הַזֶּה כֻּלּוֹ מַצָּה:    

    Shebichol haleilot anu ochlin chameitz u-matzah. Halaila

    hazeh kulo matzah.

    שֶׁבְּכָל הַלֵּילוֹת אָֽנוּ אוֹכְלִין שְׁאָר יְרָקוֹת הַלַּֽיְלָה הַזֶּה מָרוֹר:    

    Shebichol haleilot anu ochlin shi’ar yirakot. Halaila hazeh

    Maror.

    בְּכָל הַלֵּילוֹת אֵין אָֽנוּ מַטְבִּילִין אֲפִילוּ פַּֽעַם אֶחָת.

     הַלַּֽיְלָה הַזֶּה שְׁתֵּי פְעָמִים:

    Shebichol haleilot ain anu matbilin afilu pa-am echat. Halaila hazeh shtei pa-amim.

    שֶׁבְּכָל הַלֵּילוֹת אָֽנוּ אוֹכְלִין בֵּין יוֹשְׁבִין וּבֵין מְסֻבִּין.

     הַלַּֽיְלָה הַזֶּה כֻּלָּֽנוּ מְסֻבִּין:

    Shebichol haleilot anu ochlin bein yoshvin uvein m’subin.

    Halaila hazeh kulanu m’subin.

Translation:

Why do we eat {{ adjective // burnt // this is ___ // befuddled }} bread?

Why do we eat herbs so {{ unpleasant descriptive language // disgusting // ew, it’s ___ // nasty }}?

Why do we {{ something we do on Passover // drink four glasses of wine // On Passover, we _. // sing a song about a goat }} ?

Why do we {{ something we do on Passover // drink four glasses of wine // This Passover, we are going to _. // talk for so goddamn long before we eat }}?

[[ Stage direction: Youngest, yield control back to the grown-up who yielded unto thee, the person whose turn you stole. ]]

# {{ Page }}

## Pre-Post-Pre-Magid - Answering the Questions

Well, kid, here is the long and short of it: We were slaves. We got free. Now we are grateful. What we will never be free of, however, is having to tell this story. 

## Post-Pre-Magid: Think of the Children!

So as we’ve seen, kids today are confused by many things, like {{ something in today’s world that confuses kids // how cell phones work // Kids are confused by _ // the fact that some adults throw tantrums instead of doing what they’re told }} or {{ a concept or behavior that confuses kids // why praying mantises eat their mates // Kids are confused by _ // how gravity works }}. And so they have questions. We’re about to hear from four curious kids.

1) Kid One is {{ a high-born sounding name // Eggleton // __ is my name // Cordelia }} the {{ adjective  // praiseworthy // it is ___ // polymorphic }} {{ professional title // doctor // I got hired as a(n) ___ // executive director }}. They fancy themself wise, but they are, in fact, a wise-ass.

2) Kid Two is {{ an unpleasant-sounding name // Wormtail // __ is my name // Barfneck }} the {{ negative adjective // disgusting // unfortunately, it is ___ // horrible }} {{ a singular thing // bag // it is a(n) ___ // ulcer }}. They manifest all that is wicked.

3) Kid Three is {{ a monosyllabic name // Tess // __ is my name // Kirk }} the {{ past participle // regurgitated // he has ___ it // eaten }} {{ container of something and the thing it contains // box of marbles // it is a(n) ___ // bag of doritos }}. They are but a simple presence here.

4) Kid Four, everyone’s favorite (sorry), is {{ thing // raisin // this is a ___ // Shovel }} the {{ adjective // heavy // it is ___ // corny }} {{ animal // ostrich // look at the ___ // whale }}. They don’t know why they are here.

Let us exploit their questioning nature to teach them about Passover.

## # {{ Page }}

## The Wise Child’s Question 

{{ A pretentious greeting // Good morrow, Lord Farthington //  // Salutations, good citizen }}, I am the Wise Child. I have accomplished much. In fact, I should be at {{ somewhere a very good child goes // piano practice //  // Wise Child Day School }} right now.

Last year, I {{ took an intelligent action // cracked the code //  // hacked the mainframe }}. Last month,  I {{ did something noble // liberated the nation //  // found the hypotenuse }}. And just yesterday, when {{ there was a problem // the sky was falling // We were afraid because ___. // the invaders invaded }}, I saved the WORLD by {{ solving a problem // healing the sick // I was __. // finding the missing }}.

One trembles to think what I might achieve when I reach adulthood.

I doubt any of you understand the significance of my actions, or how they have contributed to the growing body of {{ elite subject matter // pre-natal brain development // I wrote a paper on ___ // post-revolution cannibalism }} theory. Nonetheless, {{ a belittling name // Hot Shot // Listen, __ // Peck }}, I will humor you, by asking you a question, so you feel included, and smart like me, for once in your life.

What are the statutes, testimonies, laws, and {{ exercises // push-ups // I was doing ___. // social dances }} that God has commanded us to do?

Again, I know the answers, I am asking so I can judge your knowledge and hear how the common folk talk.

# {{ Page }}

## The Wise Answer

Wise child, sit down. I got this. On the most BASIC level, God commands us to {{ take an action // create a file // I am going to __ // lift the puppy }} BEFORE we {{ take an action // make a cake // I am going to __ // screw the pooch }}. This means that one may not EVER {{ take an action // sing // I am going to ___. // leave the chamber }} AFTER {{ an event // the shrew parade // I attended ___. // the taming of the shrew }}. I know that sounds complicated, but fortunately there are three categories of sub-laws to clarify God’s position. They are:

### Chukim

These are the most unreasonable and nonsensical laws that you would never generate on your own, like “don’t mix wool with linen” and, “ {{ A weird piece of advice // Don’t put BBQ sauce in your pants //  // Always sit on the butter before you eat it }},” and of course, {{ An inexplicably strange law // Don’t use paper in February // // Don’t churn butter in the bathroom }}.

### Edot

These are the reasonable-but-not-necessarily intuitive laws, like {{ an obscure, but reasonable Biblical law // thou shalt milk the cow at the crack of dawn //  // honor thy neighbor's garbage }}. These also encompass laws commanding you to celebrate Shabbat, Festivals, and Important Rites of Passage, such as {{ a rite of passage // learning to ride a bike //  // the first time eating solid food }}.

### Mishpatim

These are the Intuitive Laws, like don’t get caught murdering, stealing, or {{ something you’d probably get in trouble for if you were caught by your parents // watching too much TV // I got grounded for__ // punching your brother in his private parts}}.

Do you get it now?? The laws of Pesach should make total sense to you at this point... 

## # {{ Page }}

## The Wicked Child’s Question

{{ An annoying thing to say to get attention // Yo, losers! //  // Pickle my feet, Piglets! }}!

I don’t care about you or any of my so-called people! All I wanna do is {{ take an action // sell stocks // I am going to ___ // hunt pandas }}, and eat {{ something edible // buttercream // he will eat___ // nutter butters }} in my {{ something you own // hat // check out my __ // socks }}.

Hey, {{ someone here at this Seder //  //  // Pete}}, you look like you just crawled out of {{ a place // The National Constitution Center // __ is a place // Marsden's toilet }} and {{ someone present at this Seder //  //  // Uncle Joe }} you look like you just got done {{ verb ending in -ing // swimming // look at it, ___ over there // prancing }} on {{ a place something could rest on // the dining room table // he put it on ___ // Lincoln's upper lip }}.

So why should a {{ a living or non-living thing // peach tree // it is a(n) __ // weasel }} like me care about Passover?

And what’s up with these so called “commands?”  And who is making us do all this, {{ someone who gives or has given commands // the chief of police //  // Genghis Khan }}? Like, why do i have to {{ A complaint in present tense // go to school today // I am annoyed because I have to ____ // take my grandmother to church}} tonight?  

What does all this mean to YOU?!

## # {{ Page }}

## The Wicked Answer

Wicked child, you are not part of the tribe. We already regret inviting you, for you are the worst of all children. You are worse than {{ a villain // Darth Vader // ___ is a horrible character // Haman }}, but still, we are blessed you are here.  

It is important to question the meaning of things like why {{ a phenomenon that occurs // the sun rises  // i have always wondered why __ // my belt buckle breaks after eating }} or why {{ plural noun // donkeys // those are ___ // elves }} {{ verb in present tense // deliver // they __ it // tickle }} all the {{ plural noun // green cans // those are ___ // fish }} in the back of {{ someone here at this Seder //  //  // Doug}}’s {{ something a person owns // little black box // look at my __ // garage}}

BUT it is MORE important that you blindly follow nonsensical biblical commands lest you be killed by a vengeful deity. 

So do whatever God says.

Let’s move on to your Simpler Sibling.

## # {{ Page }}

## The Simple Child’s Question

{{ something you say when you don’t know what to say // um….err... //  // Uhhhhh……...ummmmmm….. }}. I’m the Simple Child.

I have a really easy question. I think. 

{{ An extremely easy question, the answer to which everyone knows or should know // // // Which came first, the chicken, or the Big Bang? }}

I’m sorry, let me slightly rephrase that: {{ An extremely basic, fundamental question // // // What is this? }} You know what I mean?

So, yeah, that was it. Simple question. And let me guess...the answer is, {{ a singular thing (without "a" or "the") // lemon //  // bag }}. I was going to guess that...

So, I’m kinda like the plain pasta of sons. The {{ plain food // graham crackers // I am eating __  // yogurt}} of sons...some real matzah boy soup. 

Actually, that’s too complicated. I’m more like a cup of white flour, scooped and eaten right out of the bag.

Got {{ things you would find at a Seder // lamb shanks //  // bitter herbs }}?

## # {{ Page }}

## The Simple Answer

Young {{ an enlightened person or being // Confucius//  // Tom Cruise }}, I believe these are the answers you seek: 

First,  it was always {{ something doing something // a frog eating a fly // yesterday, I saw  __ // my uncle Joe reading the newspaper }}

Second,  {{ adjective + noun // green clay // look at that ___ // simple syrup }} can be used to {{ do something to something // play a piano // it can be used to _ // drive the passengers home }} even if you never thought there’d be time for it.

Third, Passover.

Pick the answer that inspires you most, and then let’s hear from your sibling, the child who learned how to {{ action requiring a high degree of skill // cut diamonds // she mastered how to __ // write a novel }} before they learned how to ask questions. 

## # {{ Page }}

## The Child-Who-Knows-Not-How-to-Ask-a-Question’s Question

This is more of a comment, really. I have been waiting all year to show you what’s in my brain.

For starters, hair eh bear eh tell abbot hoorah. Teereh ma! Then, {{ an emphatic command // come hither! //  // sell the boat and pay down your debt! }}

This, of course, brings in the issue of {{ a nonsense phrase one might shout loudly // Schlupps! SCHLUPPS! // // GOOG BOOG!! }}.

And as a counter-point, Ding Ding, biggle diggle {{ US City // Las Vegas // the great city of __ // Indianapolis}}?.

Some, however, would argue  {{ a series of rhyming mono-syllablic sounds // moo gloo poo //  // yum thumb numb grum }} until the cows come home.

But if you REALLY think about it, you realize {{ gibberish paragraph // Yurm girdle noot noot, sling a sling, gree gulla fee. Grob joppa. Glee sum pordum ug lee ensteys. Mistro feep bunto rom endy cligh. //  // phlung bistro ming nota}} wellwalla {{ famous artist // Henri Matisse //  // Katy Perry}}.

Butta cling {{ character in book or movie // Peter Pan // // Cinderella}} mish bibbity Passover?! 

## # {{ Page }}

## Meta-Dayeinu

Why, that’s the best question we’ve heard all night, and there have been a LOT of questions!

If we had heard from just the first of these obnoxious children, that would have been enough. 

If we had stopped after the second child, that would definitely have been enough!

If we were to stop reading this Haggadah right now, eat our meal, and then say to one another: “{{ something you say at the end of a conference call //  //  // let's circle back; I have a hard stop }}”, and then go off and {{ do something you do at home // take a nap // // binge Netflix }}, that would be enough for us. In fact, anything more might be too much.

However, for our ancestors  long, long ago in the land of Egypt, it was never enough. So let’s do them this honor, lift our glasses, which by now should be full of {{ a liquid // gasoline // ___ is a liquid // plasma }}, and sing a little song about how we used to be slaves.

בָדִים הָיִינוּ הָיִינוּ. עַתָּה בְּנֵי חוֹרִין:    

    Avadim hayinu. Ata b’nei chorin.

Translation: We were once slaves in Egypt, but now we are free.

Except you are NOT free to drink this cup. Put it down and let’s take a walk down memory lane... 

# {{ Page }}

#### The Mad Liberation | magid

Long ago, being a Jew was as hard as {{ something difficult // wrapping a present perfectly //  // grinding coffee beans with a nutcracker }}, because {{ the reason it was hard to be a Jew in ancient Egypt // we had to do all the real work //  // we had to make brick with no straw, whatever that means }}. Indeed, we were enslaved, and all because the wicked Pharaoh feared {{ something about the Jews that made Pharaoh afraid // our anti-Pharaoh spray // Pharaoh was afraid of _. // the Almighty’s favoritism towards us }}. Pharaoh thought he was {{ the occupant of an enviable position // the coolest kid in school //  // the king of kings }}, because he had {{ done something that you have to do to become Pharaoh // scored well on the Pharaoh aptitude test // He was only Pharaoh because he had _. // arranged the assassination of his siblings }}.

Fortunately, right about the time that {{ something that happened in history elsewhere in the world right around the time that Moses was born // corn was invented // // dinosaurs grew fur and turned into mammals }} a hero whose name rhymes with “{{ phrase that rhymes with Moses // noses for roses //  // Let my people go, sis }}” was born who would grow up to fix everything, and then some.

## # {{ Page }}

## Moses: the Early Years

Because Pharaoh wanted to “control” the Jewish population, and {{ a means of family planning // illustrated pamphlets, handed out in middle school // // girls’ education }} hadn’t been invented yet, Pharaoh condemned all baby Jewish boys to death by {{ a gruesome fate // being buried alive in compost // They were condemned to death by _. // being fed to the chimpanzees }}. 

Well, some Jews were just not having it - in particular, Yocheved the Virtuous, who was pregnant with You Know Who.

Pharoah’s goons were present when she went into labor. The instant the child launched from her fertile crescent, she cried out, “Look! {{ something shocking // two bears fighting //  // The end of the World }}!! ”, and sent her newborn straight down the Nile on a boat made from {{ items // toothbrushes //  // ironing boards }}.

Pharaoh’s daughter discovered the boy in question while making her ablutions, and named him Moses, and adopted him. “{{ Something a woman would say to explain why she decided to adopt a child as a single mother // I am just at a place in my life where I’m sick of waiting //  // I don’t need a man. I need a boy. }},” she said.

# {{ Page }}

## Moses: the Unruly Years 

Twenty years later, Moses began to question his identity. He noticed a strange tingling sensation every time he {{ very Jewish thing to do (past tense) // cooked latkes in synagogue // He __ // rocked out to Yentl }}, and a rush of joy whenever he {{ did something a few times in the past that was very Jewish // blew shofars during weekend retreats // He often  __ // read the Torah }}. He began to realize that he was Jewish.

One day, on a leisurely stroll through the palace {{ gross place // // They are in the __ // mud pits}}, he witnessed an Egyptian man {{ doing something mean // teasing // The bully was _ the victim, and it was mean // belittling }} a Jewish slave. The Egyptian said to the Jewish man, “{{ A Shakespearean insult // Away, you starvelling, you elf-skin, you dried neat’s-tongue, bull’s-pizzle, you stock-fish! //  // Go, prick thy face, and over-red thy fear, Thou lily-liver’d boy. }}.”

Moses knew what to do. He smashed the Egytian’s head with a(n) {{ very large item // boulder // That is a __.  // refrigerator }}. 

That went over about as well as {{ something unpopular // pineapple on pizza //  // beans on toast }}. 

Moses took full responsibility. He issued the following statement: “{{ A speech you would give to accept full responsibility // I want to address concerns over my recent actions. First and foremost, I accept full responsibility. I regret what I have done, and I wholeheartedly apologize to anyone who might have been hurt. //  // Mistakes were made. }}”. The Egyptians forgave him, Egyptian-style, by chasing him out to Midian under threat of {{ something you could be threatened with // getting slapped // He was chased out under threat of _. // being fed to the hens }}.

## # {{ Page }}

## A Mission of Manumission

Now let’s get to the point. Moses was {{ doing something // walking to the mailbox // // eating pears }}, and he saw {{ an item that should NOT be on fire // a house // That is _, and it is on fire, so I’m upset. // a MacBook Pro }} on fire. Even worse, it spoke:

{{ Something God says to introduce Himself // Bonjour, I am God. //  // Bow down to Me and only Me. Hello. }}.

God continued:

    Get thee back to Egypt, and free the Jews.

Moses said to God, “My skills mostly lie in {{ a strange area of skill // the arts of war // She is skilled in __. // balancing things on other things }}. Am I really the best person for this job?”

God retorted:

    I will do literally all the work.

    All you have to do is speak.

Moses retorted, “But...{{ An excuse // The dog ate my homework // // I have a hard stop at 3:30}}.”

God commanded:

    It shall be easy.

    Just repeat what I say.

Moses said, “What I say. What I say. What I...”

God cut him off:

    I mean to Pharaoh.

    I’ll explain a plague to you,

    And you’ll explain it to him.

    Go now.

    {{ Logistical instructions from God to Moses // When you go to see Pharaoh, wear something dignified, but not too dignified. //  // Pack a staff. }}

### # {{ Page }}

### Blood | dam

Moses moseyed into Pharaoh’s hall and introduced the coming plagues by saying, “{{ A polite way of telling people you're about to turn the river into blood // Sir, I apologize, but I am about to turn your river gently into blood //  // Drink blood, my good sir }}”.

And then there was blood.

Pharoah delighted in the novelty that first week, but he got sick of receiving complaints of his people having to {{ do something people normally do with water // bathe //  // take their probiotics }} with blood or cook their {{ something you cook in water // couscous //  // kidney beans }} with it.

Pharaoh, though, still had water, as everyone’s blood had been turned into water, so he could just cut off someone’s head and brush his teeth if he wanted. Moreover, changing the river into blood was a well-known Egyptian parlor trick, like {{ a parlor trick // yanking a tablecloth out from under dishes  //  // turning your tongue upside-down }}. So Pharaoh went back to {{ doing a leisure activity // reclining on plush couches // // playing golf with his attorney }}, and the Jews remained enslaved.

### # {{ Page }}

### Plague Combo One: Frogs (tzfardeiya) and Lice (kinim)

With renewed determination, so spake Moses “{{ An ominous statement // Prepare for the worst //  // To thee, this day, I send a thousand travails }}”.

Suddenly, there were frogs {{ inside a place where you wouldn’t want to find frogs // in your underwear // I’m upset because there are frogs  _. // in the dishwasher }}, frogs {{ on a place upon which you would be upset to find frogs // on every credenza // I can’t believe there are frogs _. // on the dining room table }}, and frogs {{ in a place where you would be upset to find frogs // under mother’s robes // I am shocked there are frogs _. // behind the fertility statues}}. 

The frogs symbolized {{ something frogs symbolize // the need to hop to it // Frogs symbolize _. // the virtues of staying wet and warm }}. It wasn’t terrible. 

But things didn’t get better when God said, “Let there be Lice!” and every single speck of Egyptian dirt morphed into lice. {{ dirty things // gardening gloves, after a day in the garden // _ are dirty. // my shoes, after a strenuous hike }} crawled with vermin. Lice danced {{ in a place where one wouldn’t want lice  // around your neck // You wouldn’t want lice _. // in my mouth }}.  {{ places that can get dirty // Children’s rooms //  // Kitchen cabinets }} were now bursting with lice, instead of dirt. The dirty dishes were now licey dishes. Sand castles became lice castles.

“My king,” pleaded one child, “please free the Jews, for I am caked in lice.” His name was Lice Cake, and his only wish was that he could go back to being caked in dirt.

To make his point, he broke out into song:

[[ Sing the following to the tune of Teenage Dirtbag, the hit single from Wheatus from the year 2000 CE ]]

    I’m just a teenage lice-bag, baby

    Listen to {{ a band or musician stage name that involves “lice” // Lice-T //  // Vanilla Lice }}, baby, with me.

“My people are thanking me for their high quality of lice!” Pharoah mused. “The Jews stay!”

# {{ Page }}

### Plague Combo Two: Wild Animals (arov), Cattle Disease (dever), and Boils (scheen)

And God said, “Let there be {{ adjective // angry // I am _. // rampaging }} {{ large mammals // woolly mammoths //  // tapirs }}, {{ adjective // gleeful // I am _. // furious }} {{ large reptiles // Tyrannosauruses Rex // // Komodo dragons }}, and {{ adjective // swingin’ // // free-wheeling }} {{ scary animals // tigers // // fur seals }}, and let them convince Pharaoh to free the Jews.”

The beasts were very persuasive. They {{ took a destructive action // threw a brick through a window //  // damaged the school }}. They {{ took an offensive action // slept through the Pledge of Allegiance // They _, and it was offensive // put their feet on the desk }}. They went into {{ local businesses // pharmacies // // WaWas }} and used the restrooms without purchasing anything.

Of grave concern, the beasts approached the cattle of Egypt and {{ did something wild animals shouldn’t be doing to/with cattle // wrestled // The wild beasts _ the cattle.  // snuggled }} them. Unfortunately, this gave all the cattle {{ a terrible infectious disease // lassa fever // They got infected with _.  // tetanus}}.

With their big, feverish eyes and {{ cute characteristic // smooth fur // Those animals are cute, because they have _.  // high-pitched whining }}, the diseased cattle were so cute to the children of Egypt, the kids couldn’t help but {{ do an activity that you do with a pet // play fetch with // I am going to _ my dog. // cuddle }} them. And then the children all erupted in boils, as the cattle disease had jumped species yet again.

The parents of Egypt {{ did something that parents do with their kids // went on an educational hike // the parents _ with their kids // read bedtime stories }} with their kids, contracted the boils, and thus the problem boiled out of control.

“{{ a consoling phrase // you’ll get through it //  // I’m sorry for your loss }},” said Pharoah as he left the palace, looking for more Jews to enslave.

# {{ Page }}

### Plague Combo Three: Hail (barad), Locusts (arbeh), and Darkness (choshech)

“I hate to burst your boils,” said God, “but I’m gonna. With hail.”

Like large {{ spherical objects // globes //  // bowling balls }}, hail rained down upon Egypt, popped every exposed boil, {{ did destructive acts // derailed trains // they _  // burnt cities to the ground }}, and annihilated all the Egyptian crops. Following that, locusts descended upon the fields and ate all of the destroyed crops. Then {{ something bad happened // the coffee shop only had decaf // Everyone was upset because _. // the stock market tanked on inflation woes }}. Hungry Egyptians tried to eat the locusts, but they couldn’t catch them because God turned off the Sun.

“{{ Something you say when you’re upset // Gosh darn it // // Woe is me }}!” cried the children, who were naked, for the locusts had eaten their clothes, “At least when we had light we could SEE those cute little diseased cows.”

Safe within his palace, Pharaoh idly asked, “How’s the weather today, {{ derisive term for people (plural) // fools //  // punks }}?”

“All hail, Pharaoh,” the Egyptians replied.

“All hail me, indeed,” said Pharaoh, and went back to {{ doing a leisure activity for noblemen // pheasant hunting // Members of the nobility spent their time _. // donating money to elite universities }}, pointedly without freeing the Jews.

The people of Egypt learned to cope with the new normal by {{ something you could do to deal with your land being overrun by locusts // making locust flour, which is high in protein // We will make the best of this locust situation by _. // keeping pet locusts }}.

### # {{ Page }}

### Slaying of the First Born | makat Bechorot

Losing patience, God decided to personally go house to house, door to door, and kill the first-born in each family with {{ a weapon // nunchucks  // I have __ // an axe }}. The first child He killed was sitting in darkness gnawing a frog skeleton, scratching his lice bites. “I’ve had a good life,” he said.

The Jews were exempt, as Moses had tipped them off to God’s rampage. All they had to do to protect themselves was {{ something you do to protect yourself // wear sunscreen // Make sure you _, to protect yourself // buy homeowner’s insurance  }}, and all Jewish first-borns were mercifully spared. That’s why we call it “Passover.” The Jewish people celebrated by saying, “{{ a celebratory phrase // hooray! // // huzzah }}.”

“Ye Jews may finally get out of Egypt!” Pharaoh decreed. “There’s no time to bake bread, and there’s no time to {{ do something one does in preparation for leaving // grab your keys // Before you go, make sure you _. // water the plants }}.”

So Moses and the Jews departed Egypt towards freedom. Moses split the Red Sea in two to impress his {{ significant person in your life // mom // She is your_  // girlfriend }}, and the Jews lived happily ever after wandering in the blistering Sinai desert. 

# {{ Page }}

## Dayeinu

In freeing the Jews, God did so much more than the bare minimum required. 

If God had merely  {{verbed (past tense) a noun // funneled a beer // he once ___ // sat on a toilet}}, that would have been ok. 

Now if God had  {{verbed (past tense) a noun // baked a cake // he once ___ // picked his nose}}, that would have been fine. 

If God had  {{verbed (past tense) a noun // bit his tongue // he once ___ // farmed some vegetables}}, that would’ve worked well, too.

This is summed up best in a 5-minute song. 

[[ STAGE DIRECTION: All sing Dayeinu. ]]

אִלּוּ הוֹצִיאָֽנוּ מִמִּצְרַֽיִם, דַּיֵּנוּ:    

    Ilu hotzianu mi-mitzrayim, Dayeinu

    If God had only taken us out of Egypt, that would have been enough!

אִלּוּ נָתַן לָֽנוּ אֶת־הַתּוֹרָה, דַּיֵּנוּ:    

    Ilu natan lanu et ha-Torah, Dayeinu

    If God had only given us the Torah, that would have been enough.

אִלּוּ הוֹצִיאָֽנוּ מִמִּצְרַֽיִם, דַּיֵּנוּ:    

    Ilu hotzianu mi-mitzrayim, Dayeinu

    If God had only taken us out of Egypt, that would have been enough!

אִלּוּ נָתַן לָֽנוּ אֶת־הַתּוֹרָה, דַּיֵּנוּ:    

    Ilu natan lanu et ha-Torah, Dayeinu

    If God had only given us the Torah, that would have been enough.

# # {{ Page }}

## The Passover symbols

[[ STAGE DIRECTION: Hold up a proverbial shank bone, or pretend to ]]

This, my Jews, is a {{ handheld item // coffee cup // I am holding a ___// digital watch }}. It represents a dead lamb. I bring it everywhere with me. 

[[ STAGE DIRECTION: Hold up some proverbial matzah, or pretend to ]]

This is a  {{ flat thing// plate // The earth is as flat as a___// rug }}. It’s probably the most famous passover symbol. It represents settling for the next best thing.

[[ STAGE DIRECTION: Hold up some proverbial maror (horseradish), or pretend to ]]

Lastly, but not the last thing before we eat, this {{ barely edible item // nutritional yeast floating in vinegar // // tuna fish }}, is a bitter herb. It symbolizes the bitterness of slavery and of having to wait 25 hours to eat dinner.

# # {{ Page }}

## Wine Shots, Part Deux

This is our  {{very old birthday number // millionth // On my __ birthday // 140th }} glass of wine. Sing.

בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, בּוֹרֵא פְּרִי הַגָּפֶן:    

    Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam, borei p’ree hagafen.

    We praise God, Ruler of Everything, who creates the fruit of the vine.

# # {{ Page }}

## Wash your hands and get back to work | rachtza

They say you shouldn’t {{ do an unclean act // make a mud castle // I am going to ___. // squirt squid ink }} where you {{ do an action that requires cleanliness // eat // It had better be clean when I ___. // perform surgery }}. Well, I just did. I did it so hard, YOUR hands are dirty. So let’s wash our hands. I have to wash my {{ body part // foot // This is my ___. // sternum }}, too, because that’s what I did it with.

We wash our hands twice because the number two symbolizes {{ something that the number two symbolizes // masculine and feminine //  // fake cheese and fake meat }}, and because some of us {{ did something that can make your hands dirty // went a-digging in the garden // My hands are dirty because I _. // spilled pretend wine on them }} since the urchatz.

As we pretend to wash our hands, say this with me. Do NOT sing this.

    בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ אֱלֹהֵֽינוּ מֶֽלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, אֲשֶׁר קִדְּשָֽׁנוּ בְּמִצְוֹתָיו, וְצִוָּנוּ

 עַל נְטִילַת יָדָֽיִם:    

    Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam, asher kid’shanu b’mitzvotav v’tzivanu

    al n’tilat yadayim.

# # {{ Page }}

## Well, bless my little bread  | motzi matzah

At this point in the seder, it is customary for {{ Name of person present here at this gathering // // __ is with us tonight // Josh }} to {{ engage in an activity // square dance  // he always loves to _____ // yodel }}

So, to keep with tradition, please do this so that we may move forward. 

[[ STAGE DIRECTION: Dramatically Pause ]]

Ok now, everyone hold up some matzah while we all sing to bless this breadless bread.

     בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵֽינוּ מֶֽלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, הַמּוֹצִיא לֶֽחֶם מִן הָאָֽרֶץ:

    Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam, hamotzi lechem min ha-aretz.

    We praise God, Ruler of Everything, who brings bread from the land.

 

בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵֽינוּ מֶֽלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, אֲשֶׁר קִדְּשָֽׁנוּ בְּמִצְוֹתַָיו וְצִוָּֽנוּ עַל אֲכִילַת מַצָּה:    

    Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam, asher kid’shanu b’mitzvotav v’tzivanu

    al achilat matzah.

    We praise God, Ruler of Everything, who made us holy through obligations, commanding us to eat matzah.

# # {{ Page }}

## Justa little bittah more | maror

We now sing as we spread delicious charoset and religiously-significant (kinda gross) maror on so-gross-it-has-to-be-religiously-significant matzah. This represents the bittersweetness of doing rituals when you’re hungry. The sweetness represents {{ something good about life // friends and family // // leisure }}. Just dip--do not eat.

    בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיַָ אֱלֹהֵֽינוּ מֶֽלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, אֲשֶׁר קִדְּשָֽׁנוּ בְּמִצְוֹתָיו וְצִוָּֽנוּ עַל אֲכִילַת מָרוֹר:

    Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam, asher kid’shanu b’mitzvotav v’tzivanu al achilat maror.

    We praise God, Ruler of Everything, who made us holy through obligations, commanding us to eat bitter herbs.

 

## # {{ Page }}

## Eat, but not the meal | koreich

We now eat this  {{ collection of foods that doesn’t go together well // cream cheese popsicle // after trying a ____ he decided he wouldn’t eat that ever again // cream cheese tuna popsicle }} as our ancestors did before us. In the words of the great Rabbi {{ very Jewish-sounding name // Shmuel Baruchstein //  // Shapiroberg }}, this symbolizes {{ something bittersweet // saying goodbye // // sweet sorrow }}.

## # {{ Page }}

## Revise the Haggadah endlessly

As is tradition, we will now workshop the entire Haggadah up to this point, and refine it into a product we can charge money for, in observation of the unpleasant tasks performed by our ancestors, the Jews.

JUST KIDDING. 

# # {{ Page }}

## OMG can we pretend to eat now!? | shulchan oreich

JEEZ, we get it, you’re hungry, EAT. When you are ready to conclude the seder (after the meal) go to the next page

## # {{ Page }}

## The THIRD glass of wine (starting to feel it yet?)

Please have your third glass of wine (we hope you didn’t have any more wine during dinner), and sing another song.

    בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, בּוֹרֵא פְּרִי הַגָּפֶן:

    Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam, borei p’ree hagafen.

    We praise God, Ruler of Everything, who creates the fruit of the vine.

# # {{ Page }}

## Elijah’s cup. Ghosts like getting drunk, too! 

Elijah can not only open doors, but he can get into a Zoom meeting without the password. He’s here right now. Pour him a drink and tell him how you really feel. Repeat after me. 

Thank you Elijah for being such a(n)  {{ adjective // funny // // awful }} spirit. 

Everyone! 

[[ All repeat what was just said, like “Thank you Elijah…” ]]

Now let's sing! 

אֵלִיָּֽהוּ הַנָּבִיא, אֵלִיָּֽהוּ הַתִּשְׁבִּי,    

אֵלִיָּֽהוּ, אֵלִיָּֽהוּ,אֵלִיָּֽהוּ הַגִּלְעָדִי.    

בִּמְהֵרָה בְיָמֵֽנוּ יָבוֹא אֵלֵֽינוּ    

עִם מָשִֽׁיחַ בֶּן דָּוִד,    

עִם מָשִֽׁיחַ בֶּן דָּוִד.    

    Eliyahu hanavi

    Eliyahu hatishbi

    Eliyahu, Eliyahu, Eliyahu hagiladi

    Bimheirah v’yameinu, yavo eileinu

    Im mashiach ben-David,

    Im mashiach ben-David

    Elijah the prophet, the returning,

    the man of Gilad:

    return to us speedily, in our days with the messiah, son of David.

# # {{ Page }}

## Closing rites

## The FOURTH glass of wine

As we drink this last cup of wine, we contemplate what we want for this year. I, for one, want {{ a thing you want // money // I want ____ // tacos }}. As we sing, we praise God, we appreciate one another, and we cherish the time we have together and the memories we create. And this lengthy, unique Haggadah we have created together. 

    בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, בּוֹרֵא פְּרִי הַגָּפֶן:

    Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam, borei p’ree hagafen.

 

    לְשָׁנָה הַבָּאָה בִּירוּשָׁלָֽיִם: 

    L’shana haba-ah biy’rushalayim!

